Chain Fusion Docs: Ethereum -> ICP for ETH Devs (#2977)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/multi-chain/ethereum/using-eth/eth-comparison.mdx

## Terminology mapping
This table summarizes the key terminology differences between Ethereum and ICP:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
  <th> Ethereum term </th>
  <th> ICP term </th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
  <td> Smart contract </td>
  <td> Canister </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Gas </td>
  <td> Cycles </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Shard </td>
  <td> Subnet </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Node </td>
  <td> Replica </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Account </td>
  <td> Principal </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> DAO </td>
  <td> SNS, a DAO using ICP's [unique framework](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/sns/). However, ICP DAOs can launch without using this framework. </td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

In addition, ICP has implemented similar token standards as Ethereum:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
  <th> Ethereum standard </th>
  <th> ICP standard </th>
</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
  <td> ERC-20 </td>
  <td> [ICRC-1/ICRC-2](../../../../references/icrc1-standard) </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> ERC-721 </td>
  <td> [ICRC-7](https://github.com/dfinity/ICRC/blob/icrc7-wg-draft/ICRCs/ICRC-7/ICRC-7.md) </td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

> ## Smart contract development comparison

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Smart contracts
```

> Both Ethereum and ICP allow developers to deploy programs that run on the blockchain. These programs are referred to as smart contracts in Ethereum and canister smart contracts, or simply just [canisters](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/overview/) on ICP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Ethereum and ICP allow developers to deploy programs that run on-chain. These programs are referred to as smart contracts on Ethereum and canister smart contracts, or simply just [canisters](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/overview/), on ICP.
```

This comparison provides an overview of the key differences in smart contract development on Ethereum and ICP.

> ## Key differences:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Key differences
```

> ### Creation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Creation
```

**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are written in Solidity and deployed immutably onto the blockchain.

> **ICP**: Canisters can be written in any language that complies to WASM including [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/), [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/Typescript), [Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/getting-started/motoko-introduction), and [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Canisters can be written in any language that complies to Wasm including [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/), [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/Typescript), [Motoko](/docs/current/motoko/main/getting-started/motoko-introduction), and [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/).
```

> ### Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Deployment
```

**Ethereum**: Developers typically use development frameworks like Hardhat or Truffle to compile and deploy their smart contracts. 

> **ICP**: Developers use dfx which is a similar development environment. [DFX](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install/#installing-dfx-via-dfxvm) is a command-line tool that interacts with the IC SDK and allows developers to compile and deploy their canisters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Developers use `dfx` which is a similar development environment. [`dfx`](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/install/#installing-dfx-via-dfxvm) is a command-line tool that interacts with the IC SDK and allows developers to compile and deploy their canisters.
```

> ### Testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Testing
```

**Ethereum**: Developers can utilize testnets such as Sepolia for deploying and testing smart contracts before deploying to the mainnet.

> **ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/ide/playground/) on mainnet is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/ide/playground/) on mainnet is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility thank on Ethereum to iterate and refine their canisters.
```

Author: @jessiemongeon1 Can you please take a look at this suggestion?

Reviewer: Updated suggestion

> ### Paying for gas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Paying for gas
```

> **ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/ide/playground/) on mainnet is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters than on Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-docs/developer-tools/ide/playground/) on the mainnet is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their smart contracts than on Ethereum.
```

> **Ethereum**: Users pay for gas fees directly using the crypto wallet they connect with the dapp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Ethereum**: Users pay for gas fees directly using the crypto wallet they connect to the dapp.
```

**ICP**: Using the [reverse gas model](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost/#the-reverse-gas-model), the dapp developers, not the users, pay for the gas fees. The reverse gas model aims to provide a smoother user experience by eliminating upfront fees.

> ### Updates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Updates
```

**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are immutable. To update functionalities, developers need to create a new smart contract and migrate data.
**ICP**: Developers can create upgradeable or non-upgradable (also known as "blackholed") canisters. Upgradable canisters allow updates by reinstalling the code or deploying a new version. Non-upgradable canisters are similar to Ethereum smart contracts.

> ### Consensus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Consensus
```

> ***Ethereum**: Ethereum uses [Proof of Stake](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/) as its consensus mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***Ethereum**: Ethereum uses [proof of stake](https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/consensus-mechanisms/pos/) as its consensus mechanism.
```

> ***ICP**: The IC consensus protocol provides cryptographically guaranteed finality. The approach on ICP avoids the drawbacks of probabilistic finality used in Bitcoin-like protocols, which include the weak notion and increased time to finality. The consensus mechanism of ICP ensures faster and more secure transaction finality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
***ICP**: The IC consensus protocol provides cryptographically guaranteed finality. The approach on ICP solves the drawbacks of probabilistic finality used in Bitcoin-like protocols, including slow finality times. ICP ensures faster and more secure transaction finality.
```

This comparison provides an overview of the key differences in smart contract development on Ethereum and ICP.

## Key differences:

### Creation:
**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are written in Solidity and deployed immutably onto the blockchain.
**ICP**: Canisters can be written in any language that complies to WASM including [Rust](../../../../developer-docs/backend/rust/), [Typescript](../../../../developer-docs/backend/Typescript), [Motoko](../../../../developer-docs/backend/motoko/), and [Python](../../../../developer-docs/backend/python/).

### Paying for gas

**Ethereum**: Users pay for gas fees directly using the crypto wallet they connect with the dapp.
**ICP**: Using the [reverse gas model](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost/#the-reverse-gas-model), the dapp developers, not the users, pay for the gas fees. The reverse gas model aims to provide a smoother user experience by eliminating upfront fees.

### Updates
**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are immutable. To update functionalities, developers need to create a new smart contract and migrate data.

> **ICP**: Developers can create upgradeable or non-upgradable (also known as "blackhole") canisters. Upgradable canisters allow updates by reinstalling the code or deploying a new version. Non-upgradable canisters are similar to Ethereum smart contracts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Developers can create upgradeable or non-upgradable (also known as "blackholed") canisters. Upgradable canisters allow updates by reinstalling the code or deploying a new version. Non-upgradable canisters are similar to Ethereum smart contracts.
```

### Testing

**Ethereum**: Developers can utilize testnets such as Sepolia for deploying and testing smart contracts before deploying to the mainnet.

> **ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-tools/ide/playground.mdx) is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-tools/ide/playground.mdx) on mainnet is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters.
```

---
keywords: [intermediate, ethereum, eth, icp]
---

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Understanding ICP for Ethereum developers

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Intermediate", "Ethereum"]} />

> ````

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Overview
This guide is designed to help Ethereum developers understand the core concepts of ICP, focusing on the terminology and functionalities that differ between the two protocols. While the underlying concepts might be similar, ICP utilizes different terms to describe them.

> For a feature comparison between the two protocols, refer to the [Quick Comparison with ICP and Ethereum](../../../../developer-docs/getting-started/overview-of-icp#quick-comparison-with-ethereum).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a feature comparison between the two protocols, refer to the [quick comparison between ICP and Ethereum](/docs/current/developer-docs/getting-started/overview-of-icp#quick-comparison-with-ethereum).
```

## Terminology mapping
This table summarizes the key terminology differences between Ethereum and ICP:

<table>
<thead>
<tr>

>   <th> Ethereum Term </th>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <th> Ethereum term </th>
```

>   <th> ICP Term </th>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <th> ICP term </th>
```

</tr>
</thead>

<tbody>
<tr>
  <td> Smart contract </td>
  <td> Canister </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Gas </td>
  <td> Cycles </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Shard </td>
  <td> Subnet </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Node </td>
  <td> Replica </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> Account </td>
  <td> Principal </td>
</tr>

<tr>
  <td> DAO </td>

>   <td> SNS (ICP has a specific DAO framework named an [SNS](../../../../developer-docs/daos/sns/). However, DAOs can launch without using this framework) </td>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <td> SNS, a DAO using ICP's [unique framework](/docs/current/developer-docs/daos/sns/). However, ICP DAOs can launch without using this framework. </td>
```

</tr>

## Smart contract development comparison

> Both Ethereum and ICP allow developers to deploy programs that run on the blockchain. These programs are referred to as smart contracts in Ethereum and [canisters](../../../../developer-docs/smart-contracts/overview/) on ICP. Occasionally, the phrase “canister smart contracts” is also used on ICP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both Ethereum and ICP allow developers to deploy programs that run on the blockchain. These programs are referred to as smart contracts in Ethereum and smart contract canisters, or simply just [canisters],(/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/overview/) on ICP. 
```

This comparison provides an overview of the key differences in smart contract development on Ethereum and ICP.

> ## Key differences:
> 
> ### Creation:
> **Ethereum**: Smart contracts are written in Solidity and deployed immutably onto the blockchain.
> **ICP**: Canisters can be written in any language that complies to WASM including [Rust](../../../../developer-docs/backend/rust/), [Typescript](../../../../developer-docs/backend/Typescript), [Motoko](../../../../developer-docs/backend/motoko/), and [Python](../../../../developer-docs/backend/python/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Key differences

### Creation
**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are written in Solidity and deployed immutably onto the blockchain.
**ICP**: Canisters can be written in any language that complies to Wasm including [Rust](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/rust/), [Typescript](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/Typescript), [Motoko](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/motoko/), and [Python](/docs/current/developer-docs/backend/python/).
```

Reviewer: Should we include an example Solidity 'Hello, world!' contract and an example Rust/Motoko 'Hello, world!' canister to show a side-by-side of the syntax?

Reviewer 2: i think that's a great idea. small nitpick, typescript and python aren't compiled to Wasm. they have an interpreter written in rust that can be compiled to wasm. the interpreter then runs within the canister and interprets the js/python canister code.

> 

Reviewer: We should add a 'Deployment' section that details how Ethereum uses tools like Hardhat/Truffle for deployment while ICP uses dfx.

Reviewer 2: we could also highlight that `scaffold-eth` is similar to our `dfx new` command

Author: Thank you for the idea! I will add by EOD tomorrow.

### Paying for gas

**Ethereum**: Users pay for gas fees directly using the crypto wallet they connect with the dapp.

> **ICP**: Using the [reverse gas model](../../../../developer-docs/gas-cost/#the-reverse-gas-model), the dapp developers, not users, pay for the gas fees. The reverse gas model aims to provide a smoother user experience by eliminating upfront fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ICP**: Using the [reverse gas model](/docs/current/developer-docs/gas-cost/#the-reverse-gas-model), the dapp developers, not the users, pay for the gas fees. The reverse gas model aims to provide a smoother user experience by eliminating upfront fees.
```

> 

Reviewer: Should we add a section on token standards and mention ERC20 on Ethereum, then ICRC-1/2 on ICP?

Reviewer 2: great idea, we can also add ICRC7 vs ERC721

Author: Thank you for the idea! I will add by EOD tomorrow.

> ### Updates:
> **Ethereum**: Smart contracts are immutable. To update functionalities, developers need to create a new smart contract and migrate data.
> **ICP**: Developers can create upgradeable or non-upgradable (also known as "blackhole") canisters. Upgradable canisters allow updates by reinstalling the code or deploying a new version. Non-upgradable canisters are similar to Ethereum smart contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Updates
**Ethereum**: Smart contracts are immutable. To update functionalities, developers need to create a new smart contract and migrate data.
**ICP**: Developers can create upgradeable or non-upgradable (also known as "blackhole") canisters. Upgradable canisters allow updates by reinstalling the code or deploying a new version. Non-upgradable canisters are similar to Ethereum smart contracts.
```

> ### Testing
> **Ethereum**: Developers can utilize testnets for deploying and testing smart contracts before deploying to mainnet.
> 
> **ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](../../../developer-tools/ide/playground.mdx) is available for canisters written into Motoko. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Testing

**Ethereum**: Developers can utilize testnets such as Sepolia for deploying and testing smart contracts before deploying to the mainnet.
**ICP**: Currently, testing is done in the local environment. A [playground environment](/docs/current/developer-tools/ide/playground.mdx) is available for canisters, but deployment time is limited to 20 minutes. However, the ability to upgrade and delete canisters on the mainnet allows developers greater flexibility to iterate and refine their canisters.
```

Reviewer: The Motoko Playground supports canisters in any language, not just Motoko (despite its name)
